As we talk about the talent that the College of
Education has and has enjoyed and the fact that the
college is attracting really top quality people
in reading and in a lot of the areas. Well, and top
students too. Sure. Where is the motivation
primarily from to get these people to really reach
their highest potential if they're not already
doing so? Well, I think we have some. I think we have
a lot of outstanding people, and I think we have
some people who are pretty close to reaching their
potential. I'm not sure if anybody ever reaches
their full potential, but I think we have some that
are doing it. But I think that as a college, maybe
not so much as individuals, but more as a college,
or as groups or as programs to gain national
visibility in certain areas of research and
recognition, I don't think we're reaching our
potential there. I think we're doing a good job. I
think we're recognized as a good school. But I
don't think we're reaching our potential there.
And what could you see as the solution to that
dilemma? I mean, how do you see that changing?
Well, I think if we're going to change it, I think
we're going to have to set some incentives or some
reasons Why? What would be some incentives that
you think would provide the right motivation?
Well, set some goals and some program development
or research goals or collaborative goals and tie
it to salary increases and set some. There have to
be some incentives. I mean, if I'm going to get my
salary no matter what I do, you know, and you're on a
12-month contract, wife, Why should I go out here
and I'm going to do what I want to do because this is
what I'm interested in. And I think to a certain
extent you ought to have that in a university. But I
think that we're going to have to have some, we're
going to have to set some goals and I think we're
going to have to develop some incentives. Okay.
Let's talk about that for just a second because
part of this organizational behavior and
decision making and so forth, setting goals is the
first one of any of them. How are goals set for the
College of Education? Is it done strictly by
department or is there goals for the whole deal?
Well, I think that's an area that we need to be
working on to set goals and improve our planning
process. And I wouldn't say that that's so much a
fault of the colleges of the university. I think
that now they're starting with a new chancellor
and everything, they're starting a planning
process now. And I think that if they do it
correctly, then it could be a good experience.
There was a study a few years back called the Target
2000. That was basically a goal-setting type
project. Have the goals that the College of
Education set at that time been reached and have
they been evaluated? to see where we are compared
to where the... I'm not aware that they have, so
yeah. We talked about it at the Development
Council meeting about going back to see where we
are from... I think that would be a good idea, yeah.
I think that would be a good idea. Okay. You've been
at Texas A&M now for 17 years? 17 years. And so I'm
sure that, like everybody else, you have your own
little crystal ball as to where you see there's
some dramatic things coming up that are going to
affect the College of Education and the
legislature. has its way and so forth. What do you
think this college is going to become? What is
going to become of the college and how will it be
affected in your opinion? Well, I'm not really
sure my crystal ball is too clear right now. One
thing I'm concerned about is what's going to
happen to teacher education and colleges of
education in the state. I think we still don't know
what the fallout is of 994 And I'm concerned about
that. I know the dean, and I know a lot of people are.
And I think that there's a lot of uneasiness among
faculty in the college right now, wondering
about, you know, we're going to a five-year
program. You have this 18-hour requirement, or,
you know, the undergraduate degrees and teacher
education have more than 18 hours in education.
And they're still waiting for the...
coordinating board and TEA to interpret that and I
think we're trying to be positive about it and that
though obviously Dean Corrigan and a lot of the key
people in teacher education think it's important
that we go to a five-year program but there is still
the possibility that the coordinating board
could limit the ability of the colleges to do that.
Why will that decision be? It's my understanding
that that some of these decisions are in the
process of being made now and that we might at least
have some fairly definitive information about
the first part of December. Because you have to set
and plan for the classes for next year and what's
going to happen. I'm really concerned about our
legislators and the image. Obviously, our
college has a good image in the state, but I'm
really concerned about the image of education and
colleges of education have in the state when you
have legislature passing a bill like that, it's
obviously a pretty poor image. And he pushed it, or
even added to the legislation, or even
interpreted that legislation very strictly, and
it could put colleges and education out of
business. How did that come about? How did that
even come to the front? Well, I think that there are
people, and I think it's a misunderstanding, I
think it's a problem on both parts. I think that
there are poor teacher education programs across
the state. Well, how would you define a poor
teacher education program? Well, you know, that
they don't have very many quality standards and
that they're very lax on the students that they let
in the teacher education programs. And the
preparation there isn't a lot, in terms of
especially the education courses, there isn't a
lot of substance to the courses. You've heard the
Mickey Mouse education courses and things of this
nature. And there are programs like that. So I
think that's one thing that has contributed to it.
I think the other thing that has contributed to it
is a lack of information or being unwilling to
listen. Because in current teacher education
programs, students aren't taking a lot of hours in
education anyway. subject matter courses and
there's a lot and we need to communicate and I guess
as educators we don't communicate very well but
there's a lot more to teaching than just knowing
the subject matter I think you have to really know
the subject matter and you have to be in courses
that are very demanding but I also think there's a
there's a methodology there's a pedagogy there's
information relating to understanding kids you
know growth and development and the whole thing
testing there's all this and and so i think there's
a misconceptions on both i think there's some poor
programs that need to be cleaned up and i think also
that the legislature and the public isn't aware we
need to tell our story a little better that's right
that's right that's right so i don't know i think
that uh i'm concerned i'm concerned about what uh
what the future might hold now i've been a teacher
and a high school counselor before I came to A&M,
and I have about 12 years of public school
experience, so I have quite a bit of public school
experience, although it's been a few years since
I've been out there. But I'm not a teacher
educator. I mean, I have the public school
experience, but I'm not a teacher educator. My
area is counseling, and so I'm very interested in
teacher education, and I've had the public school
experience, but I am not a teacher educator. Some
of these things I'm kind of looking at and I'm
involved and I'm concerned about them, but some of
them I'm not intimately involved in. Now let's
look a little bit about what you feel in your years
at A&M. You have contributed in your own special
way, or maybe even through some of the insights or
observations that you've made, and everybody's
reluctant to talk about what they've done, and
somebody said, well, you need to find that out from
somebody else. Let them say what I have done. But
what do you feel the best about, since you've been
at A&M, that you've been involved in? Well, for a
number of years, I came out of soft money position,
and I was very involved in funded research and
about 70s or about 78 when I became department head
and didn't have really the time to concentrate on
that anymore. I had a funded research project
every year or sometimes several of them. So that
was exciting and I enjoyed that. So I would say that
I was probably one of the people early on in the
college, not the only one because there were a lot
of others, but I was one of those who was out there
trying to get external funds. I would say another
thing that I would, in terms of department heads,
and what I did when I was a department head,
is the APA accreditation in the Ed Psych
department for Conacyt Psych. They had been
talking about it for a number of years and saying,
well, we're going to get a self-study together,
we're going to bring in a consultant. And one of my
main goals was to quit talking about And to me, I
don't take the full credit for it, but in terms of
leadership, I do. APA accreditation is the?
American Psychological Association. And that's
a very key, very selective type thing. When was
that? The first APA accreditation for the
counseling psych program was in 1980. And does
that have to be renewable every? Every five years.
And the other thing that I really liked about it,
that I think the faculty and students, everybody
was pleased about, is usually when you go up for
accreditation the first time, you don't get full
accreditation. You usually get three years and
probationary, or conditional, I think it's
conditional. And we got full five years and full
accreditation the first time. lots of major
universities across the country that didn't get
that. So that was very pleasing to me. And then
also, I think, before I stepped out of the
department head's position, I think that I had
helped set the groundwork for moving towards
accreditation for a school site. And I guess the
other thing, too, that I tried to do as a department
head was to
cut back on the faculty load to get faculty more
time to do research and work with students, and cut
back on the number of courses that they teach. What
is the average, and what's too much? Well, in terms
of graduate courses, two graduate courses. Is
about average? Right. In ed psych. It is in some of
the other, but in ed psych. What size classes are
they usually? Well, graduate courses usually run
10 to 15 students apiece. And are there any special
insights or anecdotes or things? One of the things
that you're doing now in this position is working
with the Development Council as part of your
office. I only have one other person that's been
involved in the Development Council, and that's
Don Clark, who was in your position when this thing
got started. Can you give me just a little bit of a
couple of insights about your association with
the Development Council and what you think that
particular entity is doing or should do or has done
to assist the College of Education in any way?
Well, I think the role of the Development Council
is changing. I think initially it was put together
more as an advisory group, and I think that there's
more pressure to go after funding. And it isn't all
from the college. I think some of it's coming
external to the college, like from the provost's
office and the president's office, and there's a
lot of competitiveness there. And so I think that
the role of the development council is changing.
But it has given me an opportunity to meet some—and
I'm not—you are, but I don't mean—I'm not—but to
meet some real fine people. I don't want to sound
patronizing. No, no. But it has. It has given me an
opportunity to meet a lot of really fine people and
interesting people. and get involved in meeting a
lot of former students and people in business and
industry that, you know, as a faculty member you
would typically, or even as an administrator, you
might not have as much of an opportunity to meet.
Okay, now that you mention this, as an
administrator, can you just give me a little bit of
insight into the eighth floor of the College of
Education? I visit up there frequently, but what
is the mechanism You know, I know it's a huge
organization, and there's a lot of
decision-making, but I don't have a feel as an
outsider, and not having worked, I've never been
to a faculty meeting, I don't know what is the
decision-making process, and what actually
happens up there as it affects the whole college.
Well, there are two different levels, or I mean,
maybe the same level, but there's a dean and his
staff, and... it would consist of two associate
deans, Brian Cohen, myself, and David Davis,
assistant dean, and then our business person,
Larry Dooling. And we meet maybe not every Monday
in case some of us are out of town, but we usually
meet every Monday morning with the dean to go
through our calendars and just go through
different things that are coming up that week or in
the future. And then we also, each of us have
bi-weekly meetings with the dean in about an hour
to kind of go through and discuss things
individually. And we have special meetings from
time to time. Then the other process,
decision-making process and direction, we have
what we call a policy committee, which consists of
all the department heads and the dean staff, and
it's chaired by the dean. And that meets the first
Tuesday, the first and third Tuesday of every
month. And occasionally there's a call meeting,
but that's when that meets.
I would say that a lot of the, that's where the
decision making and whole process evolves. In
Corrigan, there's
a lot more participation and more of a democratic
type leadership. There certainly is a very
distinct difference between the two styles. Is
there a lot of autonomy? I want to say that the
different associate deans and the different
people on the eighth floor, as far as everybody
having very specific deals, are you responsible
for certain areas only and though the decisions
come directly from you or directly from Brian Cole
or directly from David David or whoever is in that
position? The dean likes to give us, to run our, I
mean we're staff people. But he likes to, we have
certain responsibilities. So for example, can
you just give me some of the things, I know the
development council is one of yours. What are some
of the other things of your particular? Well,
development council, development, external
funding, all proposals, any funding
opportunities, all that goes through my office.
Graduate studies goes through my office. So I'm
chair of the College Graduate Instruction
Committee, which I represent from each
department, and all new course proposals or
anything related to graduate study goes through
my office. And then since I'm chair of the College
Graduate Instruction Committee, I'm also a
member of the University Graduate Council. Which
does what? It reviews all new course proposals and
anything relating to graduate study. And do those
course proposals come from the department heads
to you first? Can I take them to the graduate
instruction committee in the college or review
them? And then if we pass on them, we might ask them
to change a little bit, and then it's in accordance
with our recommendation, and he sends it out to the
graduate office. There was a comment made about
the fact that, of course, the funding to the
College of Education comes from courses and from
student hours. That's what generates the largest
amount of funds. Is that correct? And that a lot of
times, we're trying to get more courses so that I
can teach more students, so that we can, in other
words, the expression was something about we can
become a dinosaur, just trying to add more courses
so that we can have more classes. Is that a
different type of perception? Well, I think some
departments and some programs, I think we have to
look at the number of students and the number of
things we're doing and the areas that we're trying
to do too much. By trying to do too much . Well, for
instance, we have a large graduate program in the
college. I'm just talking about the specific
department. And I think for the number of faculty
that some departments have, they've just taken on
too many graduate students. And I think that to do
an adequate job, they need to cut back. I mean, for
instance, I think the graduate courses, I think an
ideal size to really interact do research and
write courses and have the dialogue that you need,
I think should be, at the most, 10 to 15 students.
And I mean, there are graduate courses that are a
lot larger than that. And I really question that in
terms of that. Yeah. I mean, then, because it's
growing so and there's so much more demand for
these courses, is there a need to just get more
faculty? Well. That's one way you can go, but you
can also get so big that the thing gets kind of
unwielding. Plus, I don't think the chances are
real good now with the economic conditions that we
have in the state and the funding that we have. I
don't think the conditions are good that we're
going to get a lot more faculty. I really think that
what we need to do is be looking at quality. And I'm
not saying we don't have quality, but I think we
need to be cutting back in some areas.
shouldn't be chairing more than four or five
doctoral students apiece. And I felt that for a
long time, and I think that we need to come back
there. And who makes those kinds of decisions?
Like, do you feel like some faculty would— Well,
the individual departments and faculty do. And we
came across—we came out with it. We had a joint
committee of our graduate instruction committee
and steering committee on inquiry that developed
a paper, and we had input from faculty and
students. It's called—I think it's How to Improve
Doctoral Research or something. And there's a
whole set of recommendations in there, and one of
them is to cut back on the number of students we have
in terms of graduates. Oh, you're talking about
the College of Education following the Texas A&M
cap? Well, maybe not quite that same way, but yeah.
Okay, one of the things though, doesn't graduate
hours generate a tremendous amount of money? But
that's something that has changed quite a bit. In
the 70s, the budget that we got, they were looking
at it. They would look at the central
administration and the dean's office would look
at how many credit hours you generated. There
isn't that pressure to do that anymore. Is that
right? What changed that? I'm not sure, Sylvia. In
our own college, it's just that we matured a little
bit and we didn't worry about it that much anymore.
Plus, I think the central administration just
quit.
Very good. Dr. Borman, I thank you very, very much
for this interview, and I believe that you've
given me some very valuable insights on the
administrative end. This is my first
administration interview.